Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber....The elephant elder....And today's story... is the last story of this season....[warm] It's about a surprise the friends planned for somebody they hadn't seen in a while....And what they learned... about love that remembers.
Today... I want to ask you something, my friends....Have you ever loved somebody...who didn't know how much you noticed them?...A friend who showed up quietly...week after week...and never said look what I did?...A grown-up who fixed the small thing...without telling you they fixed it?....What does love look like...when it remembers?...Listen carefully....The answer is in the story.
Mm....I'll tell you something, my friends....The God who made you...made you to remember...the small kind things people do.....It's how He made love to live in us....Not the big loud love that parades....The quiet love.....The long love.....The love...that notices.
Now... gather round, friends. Come close by the pond.
Um....Old Tim-Ber?....Is this... the one about Ranger Ray... coming home?
[chuckles] Mm....Yes, the dear thing....It is the one about Ranger Ray coming home....Listen close.
Now....Here we go.
It was the morning... after the Shiloh Creek Olympics....The meadow still had the little race-flags up....Shelly was sitting by the finish-line stone... humming....And Fern... was standing very still... by the Crossway signpost....Reading something.
Um....Friends?....I noticed something....Ranger Ray... left a note on the signpost.....The handwriting is his.....The ink is still fresh.....It says... he's coming home today.
TODAY?!....HE'S COMING HOME TODAY?!....FRIENDS — I got this! We need a PARTY! We need a — BIG — celebration! We need —
...Bongo?....Um....I don't think... a loud one.....He doesn't love loud....He loves... the quiet noticing.....Maybe... we make him a quiet party.
...Okay, maybe I don't got this....What's a quiet party?....I have never made a quiet anything in my life.....How does that even work?
Okay — okay....A quiet party....Quiet-party-protocol....Step one: lanterns....I have the flood-prevention valve from the Great Flood incident....It pulses water at exactly the right rhythm to make lanterns flicker without anyone winding them....I can REPURPOSE the whole pulse-rhythm.....It's a DECORATION mechanism — now!
Zippy. ...A valve...is not a decoration.
...Okay — but Shelly — if I RE-WIRE it... and re-tune the pulse... and use it as a flicker-cue for the lanterns instead of a flood-cue...
Mm.....Fine. Re-wire it.
BEHOLD!....FRIENDS!....A CELEBRATION is upon us!....And I — Gah-ring-goh, parrot of the wood — shall provide...the BERRIES!....The patch by the meadow has RECOVERED, you see....I scouted it this morning at dawn.....I shall festoon the lookout...with garlands.....Of berries.....Garland — berry — garland — berry —
Um....That's... actually perfect, Gah-ring-goh.....The lookout is...a good spot.....It's where I... guided everyone during the storm.....Last spring.
...The lookout....Yes.....And — Fern.....Before we begin.....I must tell you something.....The rock....Shelly's favourite rock....The one I claimed... the wind broke....Last autumn.....It was me.....I leaned on it.....I am sorry.
...Gah-ring-goh.....I knew.....I have known for a year.....Mm.....Thank you for saying it.
...The rock is still a fine rock.....A little leaned.....But the leaning... is part of the story now.
...Thank you, Shelly.....For waiting.....The wood is kinder.....For your patience.
Um....I remember that autumn.....The day the rock leaned.....Shelly... you came and sat by it anyway.....You sat by it... for the whole afternoon.....I watched from the meadow.....That was love too.....The sitting kind.
Mm....And so the friends began....Quietly....Each one bringing a small thing....Each one finding... that the small thing was already there...waiting for them.....A glow that had once been a worry.....A sweetness that had once been a loss.....A way through, that had once been a way around.....The friends did not know it yet....But the celebration... was being made... from what had already been kept.....One small remembered thing at a time.
FRIENDS! I crossed the bridge to get the moonflower seedling....The one Mudpuppy planted with us last spring....And — it BLOOMED....In the daylight!....The moonflower BLOOMED IN DAYLIGHT!....It NEVER does that!....It only blooms at midnight....Always.....But today... it just opened up.
Okay — okay....The moonflower-blooming-in-daylight is not in my prediction models....But I'm logging it....Bongo — bring it to the lookout.....And — be careful crossing back.....The third plank still sounds hollow when you step too fast.....I tested it yesterday.
...I'll lead the procession.....Slow.....And the friends... follow.....It's how a good arrival... works.
Um....Shelly....That's...perfect.....And I... I'll wait at the lookout.....And — there's a hidden path....From the storm.....It comes up behind the celebration spot.....Some of the friends can come that way.....A quiet arrival.....For a quiet party.
Hi — hi! Hello! I'm here! I'm here again! I came on my own this time! Can I HELP?....Please?....I brought my OWN ribbon!
Chitter!....Yes — yes — YES — come help!....Come on — you can carry...the BERRY GARLAND with Gah-ring-goh!
WAYFARERS!....A new compatriot!....Chitter — you shall help me FESTOON....It is a SACRED ART....The festoonery....Behold — the garland —
...And Chitter, my friend....I will tell you something I have not said before.....When you came to the meadow last time....I was rehearsing a soliloquy.....And you interrupted.....And I was — VEXED.....But the wood... is better with your hello.....I see that now.....Stand here, beside me.....Festoonery awaits.
Festoonery! Festoon — festoon! I LOVE the sound of that word! It's the best word I have ever heard in my life! ...But — wait — what IS festoonery, actually?!
[sighs] Mm....And then... just before he arrived....The friends sat together at the lookout.....The garlands were hung.....The lanterns were pulsing.....The moonflower was blooming, somehow, in the late afternoon light.....And the rain came....A small one.....The kind of rain that feels like a blessing... not a storm.....And Bongo... said something quiet....That nobody had said yet.
...Friends?....What if... he doesn't notice?....We worked all morning.....And — what if he gets here... and he just... walks past it all?....What if the lanterns are too quiet?....What if the berries are just... berries to him?....What if love we give... isn't love he sees?
...Okay....I don't have a calculation for that one.....I have built models for everything.....The rain timing.....The bridge load.....The valve pressure.....But not... whether a heart can see a heart....I don't know that one.
...Mm.....It's the question....It always sits under love.....The asking... if the loving is seen.
Um....I heard something once.....A small line....I think it goes....[whispers] God sees.....He's always seen.....We just... sometimes wonder...if seeing is enough.
Mm.....Fern, the dear thing.....May I ask you something?
Yes... Old Tim-Ber?
When you... love somebody for a long time....And you wonder if they see....What is the love already doing... while you wonder?
...Um.....The love is...remembering....The love is...still showing up....The love is...the small kind thing... we did anyway.....Even when... we wondered.....And — Old Tim-Ber....I think... the wondering... is part of the love too.....Because love that didn't wonder... wouldn't notice anybody.....Love is...what sees the small things.....Love remembers... the ones who weren't loud.
Mm....And then... the friends heard footsteps...on the hidden path.....Slow ones.....Familiar ones.....The kind that come home, not the kind that arrive.....And every friend at the lookout... stood very still.....And listened.
...Hello, friends.....It's me.....I'm home.
...Ranger Ray.....We... made you something.
...I see it.....The lookout.....The lanterns flickering... in that strange water-rhythm....The berry garlands.....The path I walked here, hidden but well-kept.....The moonflower... blooming in daylight, somehow.....The slow procession... led by a tortoise.....And — Chitter — you came back?....And — Fern — you... led them here?
Um....Yes, Ranger Ray.....I led them here.....The hidden path goes up easy.....And — the lookout... it's where you always... read your notes.....I thought... you would want to come home to a place you already knew.
I came back! Hi — hi! They WELCOMED me this time! I helped with the garland! I am part of the surprise!
...Ranger Ray.....I must tell you something, before the celebration continues.....The rock....Shelly's rock....I broke it.....The wind didn't.....I leaned on it.....I am sorry.....I should have said it sooner....But I am saying it now.
...Gah-ring-goh.....I heard about the rock... last autumn.....I was on the ridge that day.....I saw the lean.....I have known.....And I have been waiting... the way Shelly was waiting....For you to say it.....Thank you.
...Friends.....I want to tell you something....I knew you knew I was coming home.....I crossed the bridge this morning.....The one you built together.....And I saw... that every animal in this wood... had crossed it ahead of me....To get here.....To this lookout.....The one Fern guided everyone to... in the storm last spring.....I remember that night.....I was on the far ridge.....I saw your lantern moving... slow and steady... through the rain.....Leading them all to high ground.....Fern... I never said it then.....I am saying it now.....That was the bravest small light I have seen in a year of ranger circuits.
...Ranger Ray?....You... saw that?
He sees the LANTERNS! He sees the LANTERNS too! ...Right?....Do you also see the festoonery?
Okay — okay....Chitter — the lanterns... are technically a flicker mechanism....But yes.....He sees them.
...I have been counting.....I count every berry season....I count the morning Bongo learned to ask before acting.....I count the day Mudpuppy planted the moonflower.....I am the one who notices.....That is my job out here....And — friends — I have seen all of you....The long way home.
...Friends.....He saw it all.....He saw all of it.....Even when nobody was looking.
...Mm.....The long love.....The one that counts.
...This is the wood....And these are my friends....And I... am home... too.
Mm.....Friends..... what Fern said....The love is...remembering.....The love is...still showing up.....The small kind thing...we did anyway.....The love...that sees the small things.....Yes, the dear thing.....That's the whole story.....Every word of it.
Mm....And now, friends... before we say goodbye for the season....A small visit... from somebody who has been waiting all morning....Professor Hoot's Totally True Facts.
Greetings, my dear young listener!....A fact, for the season finale!....The word FESTOONERY... in its oldest form... means... the ancient art of hanging small kept things in a row...so that each one remembers the next.....A garland, you see... is just memory... that you can look at.....I have it on excellent authority — from me, last Tuesday.
And — bonus finale fact!....The moonflower, when it blooms in daylight, is said to indicate... by traditional reckoning... that somebody nearby has been quietly loved for a long while.....I have a SCROLL on this somewhere.....The scroll is also from last Tuesday.
Um....Professor Hoot.....I think... the moonflower just bloomed because it wanted to today.
[chuckles] Mm.....I don't believe the etymology, my friends....But the image is true enough.
Mm....Friends... before we close.....The line Fern almost remembered.....The one she heard once.....It was written long ago...by a man named Paul.....He wrote a letter... to his friends in a town called Corinth.....And in the thirteenth chapter... at the fourth verse... he wrote this....Charity suffereth long, and is kind....Charity vaunteth not itself.....Is not puffed up.....Love that waits.....Love that is kind.....Love that doesn't parade.....That's what Ranger Ray was doing... all season.....Counting.....Noticing.....And — that's what the friends did today.....They noticed... out loud.....The God who made love...made us...to do it...both ways.
Mm....And here is your life-application, friends....This week....When somebody you love does a small kind thing....Notice it.....Tell them.....Say I saw that.....Say thank you.....Maybe it's a grown-up who packs your lunch the way you like it.....Tell them you noticed the way the sandwich was cut.....Or maybe it's a friend who saved you a seat at the table.....Tell them you saw the seat-saving.....Because remembering out loud... is love.....It's how God made love...to travel.....Person to person... the long way home.
Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends....And — until next season, dear ones....Love kindly out there, little ones.
At Shiloh Creek... we walk softly....See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.